In this lesson we will learn how to use CSSA to add style to our.
TMF tables.
Now we learned in an earlier lesson that we should not use tables for layout purposes and that we should
only use tables when we have actual tabular data that we want to display.
So let's dive straight into a visual demonstration in front of you is an example page.
And to be more specific here is an example table.
Now this table does not have an ounce of CSSA applied to it.
So its appearance is incredibly bare boned.
So this is the browser default for rendering a table.
And I think we can do better.
I think that by applying a bit of custom CSSA to this table we can make it beautiful and we can also
make it easier for visitors to actually read and distill the data in the table.
So I'm going to switch over to a new tab now where I have written a bit of CSS and we can see that the
table matches the overall design of the page.
And in my opinion it's a bit easier to actually read the table but looking at a finished product isn't
very educational or helpful.
So I'm going to switch back over to this tab and we are going to spend the remainder of this lesson
working together to write CSSA and improve the appearance of our table.
Let's get started.
All right so the first thing that I want to adjust is the text alignment of the table headers so we
can see they are currently centered.
But I want them to be aligned to the left so we can see that in the table head section of our table
.
This first row uses th earth table header elements.
The rest of our table the actual data in our table uses TDD for table data.
So let's begin by targeting these th elements over in our CSSA let's create a new area or create a comment
table styles within any table element look for the table header elements and let's override their text
line to be left.
Excellent.
Next I want to give the table headers an alternate background color so that it stands out from the actual
data in the table.
So to do that within this same rule I will say background color.
I will paste in the hexadecimal color code for a green that we are using elsewhere on the page.
Let's make the text white and let's also give it a text shadow so it pops.
We don't want any blur on the shadow and we'll use a transparent black value.
Next let's add a border around each table header element and each table data or cell.
So to do that we are going to want to select both the table header elements comma.
Let's tack on another selector and all of the TV elements border.
So we want a border on all four corners.
The top bottom left and right.
So border we want to be one pixel thick.
We wanted to be a solid line.
We don't want it to be dotted or dashed.
And we want to use a color that same green value.
So we've added borders but they look a bit funny.
Especially if I zoom in a bit further you can see that there's space in between each table cell which
looks a bit odd.
So I imagine that you would want to remove that.
So to get rid of that we need to select the actual table element the parent element itself.
So the selectors simply table we look at our age T.M. the root of the entire table is simply table.
So once we've selected that in our C Ss we want to use the border spacing property and provide a value
of zero.
We can see that that removed the awkward spacing between the cells but now the borders are too thick
.
So we can see that anytime two cells touch the border is now two pixels thick because the borders are
smashing up against each other.
Ideally we only want a single border to be used between each cell.
So to fix this once again on the table element itself we can use the property named border collapse
and provided a value of collapse.
Excellent.
Now you may notice something else that's odd about the table and that is that it's not using the full
available width of our column by default tables attempt to shrink wrap themselves.
So they will only take up as much horizontal space as they absolutely need.
Now if we want to give our content a bit of extra breathing room and make sure that it uses the full
available call them with all we need to do is while we are selecting the table element itself provided
a width of 100 percent Next let's give each individual cell a bit of breathing room so that it doesn't
sit flush against the borders.
So to do that we will want to work with the rule that is targeting both the table headers and the TV
table cell elements.
Let's add a bit of padding padding 10 pixels.
Next let's add zebra striping zebra striping means we want every other row to use a different background
color so that it's easier for the human eye to track a row across its entire width.
To do this we all need to create entirely new rule within any table element.
Let's look for the T body area.
Actually let's hop over to the H T M L structure really quick.
So within this section of the table the section that actually contains the data we want to grab every
other new table row.
So we will target TR for table row and then use a pseudo selector of End Child.
AW And now this selector will grab every other table row element and then within every other table row
element we want to select all of the T-cells and then we simply want to give them an alternate background
color.
So I will use a green that we're using for the sidebar of the web page.
So now if we refresh.
Excellent.
We could alternatively instead of Aw I'd say even and then that would just simply switch so the current
cell instead of being green will be white and then every other cell will be green.
Now another thing you might have noticed about our table is that we haven't had any control over the
width of each column.
So let's imagine that we do want to have fine grained control and we only want the first column to be
about this wide since tables out here to a very strict grid layout we only need to adjust the width
of the first item of each column.
So to do that in our H.T. IMHO we can simply add unique classes to these initial table header elements
.
So let's add a class to item name named call for column item name.
Now these class names don't have any inherent meaning.
I'm making them up.
You could choose any naming system that you would like to use.
Call quantity
call price.
So now we can reference these classes in our SS.
So let's create a new rule call item name.
Now we said that we wanted the first column to take up about this much space.
So let's use percentages let's say width equals 60 percent and let's select call quantity and call price
and give them a width of 20 percent.
We always want this to add up to 100 percent.
So 60 plus 20 plus 20 is a 100 percent.
Now that we have these custom column sizes in place let's imagine that we want the first column to continue
using text align left.
But we want these second and third columns to use text align center.
Now instead of adding a special class to each and every one of these cells we can simply create a new
rule and use advanced selectors.
Let's scroll down.
Let's create a new rule inside any table element look inside each and every table row element.
And once you're in the table row only select the second and third item.
So let's look at our age team structure really quickly.
The current selector of table TR will dig into each table row.
So this is a table row this table row.
This is a table row and then we only want to select the second and third item.
So those two these two these two so to do that once we've dug into the TR element we can then look for
only the second and third child so any child to let's copy this line comma in three.
So we only want the second and third items and once we have them selected you simply want to use text
align center.
So if we refresh there you have it.
Now I will point out the way that we've been structuring our selectors in this lesson is the way you
would do it if you were setting up baseline styles meaning these styles will affect any and every table
element on your website.
Now that makes sense for setting up background colors and padding but it probably doesn't make sense
for randomly selecting every second and third cell in each row because what if on a separate page would
have on the About page we had a table that had five columns.
So what I suggest we do here is add a unique class to this table on the main parent element.
Let's give it a class of grocery list and then in our C Ss when we are making these complex selectors
based on the second and third child let's adjust the selector table Daut grocery list table datt grocery
list.
So that way these somewhat ambiguous selectors are only being applied to tables that use the grocery
list class.
So if we had a table that had six or seven columns these rules wouldn't get applied.
So with that organizational bit out of the way let's get back to the fun let's make the final stylistic
change for this lesson so we can see that this item's name is too long to fit within the column and
it drops down to a second line.
Now that obviously affects the height of this entire row is taller than all of the other rows.
And if I zoom in and if you look very closely you can see that the quantity and price text are vertically
centered.
They are only a single line but this text is two lines.
So this means that if you look very closely this four sits a few pixels lower than this text does.
And maybe you don't want that.
So maybe you want to override the web browsers default behavior of vertically aligning this content
.
So to do that all we need to do is find the rule that selecting all of our cells and provided a property
of a vertical line.
Now by default the web browser is saying vertical align.
Middle.
We don't want that we want to override that with vertical align top.
So now when I refresh.
Wait for it.
Let me zoom in and look very closely.
Three to one we can see that these two cells are now perfectly vertically aligned with the content in
the left cell.
So that's how you can control the vertical alignment and that's going to bring this lesson to a close
.
Now to be honest many of you will never find yourself needing this style tables.
Some of you will some of you won't.
But at the very least this lesson introduced you to a few new types of selectors namely the nth child
pseudo selector which you can use for much more than just selecting different table cells.
So we will see the nth child pseudo selector used again later in the course.
I encourage you to download the demo Zipp for this lesson.
Play around with some of the table styles and some of the selectors see where your curiosity takes you
.
Have fun and I will see you in the next lesson.